# Physical & Spiritual Yokes

By Mark Mayberry
9/15/2009

## Introduction

*Nelson's New Illustrated Bible Dictionary* say the yoke was "a type of harness that connected a pair of animals to a plow or similar tool."

The *New Unger's Bible Dictionary* identifies a yoke as "a bar or frame of wood by which two draft animals, especially oxen, are joined at the necks or heads for working together, for drawing a load or pulling a plow."

*The New Bible Dictionary* defines a yoke as "The rendering of several Heb. and Gk. words, used either literally for the wooden frame joining two animals (usually oxen), or metaphorically as describing one individual's subjection to another."

In the NT, this concept is communicated by the Greek word *zugos* (pronounced dzoo·**gos**) (2218). BDAG say it refers to "(1) a frame used to control working animals or, in the case of humans, to expedite the bearing of burdens, yoke in our literature (used) only figuratively of any burden (Matt. 11:29, 30; Acts 15:10; Gal. 5:1; 1 Tim. 6:1); (2) an instrument for determining weight, scale (Rev. 6:5)."

> Matthew 11:29 ... 29 "Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls (NASB).

> Matthew 11:30 ... 30 "For My yoke is easy and My burden is light." (NASB).

> Acts 15:10 ... 10 "Now therefore why do you put God to the test by placing upon the neck of the disciples a yoke which neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear? (NASB).

> Galatians 5:1 ... 1 It was for freedom that Christ set us free; therefore keep standing firm and do not be subject again to a yoke of slavery (NASB).

> 1 Timothy 6:1 ... 1 All who are under the yoke as slaves are to regard their own masters as worthy of all honor so that the name of God and our doctrine will not be spoken against (NASB).

Compound forms of this Greek word include the following:

- The Greek word **heterozugeō** (pronounced "het·er·od·zoog·**eh**·o"), a compound of *heteros* (other, another, different) and *zugos* (a yoke) meaning "to be yoked up differently, i.e. to be unequally yoked" (Thomas 2086). BDAG says this word refers to "draft animals that need different kinds of yokes, because they are of different species (e.g., an ox and a donkey), and generally = 'not belonging together', to be unevenly yoked, to be mismated with someone (Lev. 19:19; 2 Cor. 6:14)."

> Leviticus 19:19 ... 19 'You are to keep My statutes. You shall not breed together two kinds of your cattle; you shall not sow your field with two kinds of seed, nor wear a garment upon you of two kinds of material mixed together (NASB).

> 2 Corinthians 6:14 ... 14 Do not be **bound \*together** with unbelievers; for what partnership have righteousness and lawlessness, or what fellowship has light with darkness? (NASB).

- The Greek word **suzeugnumi** (pronounced "sood·**zyoog**·noo·mee"), a compound of *sun* (with, together with) and the same as *zugos* (a yoke) meaning "to yoke together" (Thomas 4801). BDAG say it means "lit. 'yoke together,' then generally to make a pair, join together, pair (Ezek. 1:11), specifically of matrimony (Matt. 19:6; Mark 10:9)."

> Ezekiel 1:11 ... 11 Such were their faces. Their wings were spread out above; each had two touching another being, and two covering their bodies (NASB).

> Matthew 19:6 ... 6 "So they are no longer two, but one flesh. What therefore God has **joined \*together**, let no man separate." (NASB).

> Mark 10:9 ... 9 "What therefore God has **joined \*together**, let no man separate." (NASB).

- The Greek word **hupozugion** (pronounced "hoop·od·**zoog**·ee·on"), a compound of *hupo* (under) and *zugos* (a yoke) meaning "a beast of burden or draught" (Thomas 5268). BDAG say it refers "originally (to) 'draught animal, beast of burden' (lit. 'under the yoke') hence 'pack animal' (oxen, mules, horses) in our lit. donkey, ass (Zech. 9:9; Matt. 21:5; 2 Pet. 2:16)."

> Zechariah 9:9 ... 9 Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion! Shout in triumph, O daughter of Jerusalem! Behold, your king is coming to you; He is just and endowed with salvation, Humble, and mounted on a donkey, Even on a colt, the foal of a donkey (NASB).

> Matthew 21:5 ... 5 "Say to the daughter of Zion, 'Behold your King is coming to you, Gentle, and mounted on a donkey, Even on a colt, the foal of a **beast** of **burden**.' " (NASB).

> 2 Peter 2:16 ... 16 but he received a rebuke for his own transgression, for a mute **donkey**, speaking with a voice of a man, restrained the madness of the prophet (NASB).

The Bible frequently refers to yokes as a symbol of servitude. Let us consider various applications of this word.

## The Yoke of Physical Servitude

The Servitude of Esau/Edom to Jacob/Israel (Gen. 27:39-40; cf. 2 Kings 8:20-23).

> Genesis 27:39-40 ... 39 Then Isaac his father answered and said to him, "Behold, away from the fertility of the earth shall be your dwelling, And away from the dew of heaven from above. 40 "By your sword you shall live, And your brother you shall serve; But it shall come about when you become restless, That you will break his **yoke** from your neck." (NASB).

> 2 Kings 8:20-23 ... 20 In his (Jehoram) days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves. 21 Then Joram crossed over to Zair, and all his chariots with him. And he arose by night and struck the Edomites who had surrounded him and the captains of the chariots; but his army fled to their tents. 22 So Edom revolted against Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time. 23 The rest of the acts of Joram and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? (NASB).

The Servitude of Israel to the Egyptians (Lev. 26:13; cf. Exod. 2:23-25).

> Leviticus 26:13 ... 13 'I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt so that you would not be their slaves, and I broke the bars of your **yoke** and made you walk erect (NASB).

> Exodus 2:23-25 ... 23 Now it came about in the course of those many days that the king of Egypt died. And the sons of Israel sighed because of the bondage, and they cried out; and their cry for help because of their bondage rose up to God. 24 So God heard their groaning; and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 25 God saw the sons of Israel, and God took notice of them (NASB).

The Servitude of Israel to foreign oppressors, like Assyria and Babylon (Deut. 28:47-48; Jer. 27:1-8).

> Deuteronomy 28:47-48 ... 47 "Because you did not serve the Lord your God with joy and a glad heart, for the abundance of all things; 48 therefore you shall serve your enemies whom the Lord will send against you, in hunger, in thirst, in nakedness, and in the lack of all things; and He will put an iron **yoke** on your neck until He has destroyed you (NASB).

> Jeremiah 27:1-8 ... 1 In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying— 2 thus says the Lord to me—"Make for yourself bonds and **yokes** and put them on your neck, 3 and send word to the king of Edom, to the king of Moab, to the king of the sons of Ammon, to the king of Tyre and to the king of Sidon by the messengers who come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah. 4 "Command them to go to their masters, saying, 'Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, thus you shall say to your masters, 5 "I have made the earth, the men and the beasts which are on the face of the earth by My great power and by My outstretched arm, and I will give it to the one who is pleasing in My sight. 6 "Now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and I have given him also the wild animals of the field to serve him. 7 "All the nations shall serve him and his son and his grandson until the time of his own land comes; then many nations and great kings will make him their servant. 8 "It will be, that the nation or the kingdom which will not serve him, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and which will not put its neck under the **yoke** of the king of Babylon, I will punish that nation with the sword, with famine and with pestilence," declares the Lord, "until I have destroyed it by his hand (NASB).

The Servitude of Israel to earthly kings (1 Kings 12:1-11; cf. 1 Sam. 8:4-20).

> 1 Kings 12:1-11 ... 1 Then Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to make him king. 2 Now when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it, he was living in Egypt (for he was yet in Egypt, where he had fled from the presence of King Solomon). 3 Then they sent and called him, and Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came and spoke to Rehoboam, saying, 4 "Your father made our **yoke** hard; now therefore lighten the hard service of your father and his heavy **yoke** which he put on us, and we will serve you." 5 Then he said to them, "Depart for three days, then return to me." So the people departed. 6 King Rehoboam consulted with the elders who had served his father Solomon while he was still alive, saying, "How do you counsel me to answer this people?" 7 Then they spoke to him, saying, "If you will be a servant to this people today, and will serve them and grant them their petition, and speak good words to them, then they will be your servants forever." 8 But he forsook the counsel of the elders which they had given him, and consulted with the young men who grew up with him and served him. 9 So he said to them, "What counsel do you give that we may answer this people who have spoken to me, saying, 'Lighten the **yoke** which your father put on us'?" 10 The young men who grew up with him spoke to him, saying, "Thus you shall say to this people who spoke to you, saying, 'Your father made our **yoke** heavy, now you make it lighter for us!' But you shall speak to them, 'My little finger is thicker than my father's loins! 11 'Whereas my father loaded you with a heavy **yoke**, I will add to your **yoke**; my father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.' " (NASB).

> 1 Samuel 8:4-20 ... 4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Ramah; 5 and they said to him, "Behold, you have grown old, and your sons do not walk in your ways. Now appoint a king for us to judge us like all the nations." 6 But the thing was displeasing in the sight of Samuel when they said, "Give us a king to judge us." And Samuel prayed to the Lord. 7 The Lord said to Samuel, "Listen to the voice of the people in regard to all that they say to you, for they have not rejected you, but they have rejected Me from being king over them. 8 "Like all the deeds which they have done since the day that I brought them up from Egypt even to this day—in that they have forsaken Me and served other gods—so they are doing to you also. 9 "Now then, listen to their voice; however, you shall solemnly warn them and tell them of the procedure of the king who will reign over them." 10 So Samuel spoke all the words of the Lord to the people who had asked of him a king. 11 He said, "This will be the procedure of the king who will reign over you: he will take your sons and place them for himself in his chariots and among his horsemen and they will run before his chariots. 12 "He will appoint for himself commanders of thousands and of fifties, and some to do his plowing and to reap his harvest and to make his weapons of war and equipment for his chariots. 13 "He will also take your daughters for perfumers and cooks and bakers. 14 "He will take the best of your fields and your vineyards and your olive groves and give them to his servants. 15 "He will take a tenth of your seed and of your vineyards and give to his officers and to his servants. 16 "He will also take your male servants and your female servants and your best young men and your donkeys and use them for his work. 17 "He will take a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will become his servants. 18 "Then you will cry out in that day because of your king whom you have chosen for yourselves, but the Lord will not answer you in that day." 19 Nevertheless, the people refused to listen to the voice of Samuel, and they said, "No, but there shall be a king over us, 20 that we also may be like all the nations, that our king may judge us and go out before us and fight our battles." (NASB).

The Servitude of Youth (Lam. 3:24-28; cf. Heb. 12:4-12)

> Lamentations 3:24-28 ... 24 "The Lord is my portion," says my soul, "Therefore I have hope in Him." 25 The Lord is good to those who wait for Him, To the person who seeks Him. 26 It is good that he waits silently For the salvation of the Lord. 27 It is good for a man that he should bear the **yoke** in his youth. 28 Let him sit alone and be silent Since He has laid it on him (NASB).

> Hebrews 12:4-12 ... 4 You have not yet resisted to the point of shedding blood in your striving against sin; 5 and you have forgotten the exhortation which is addressed to you as sons, "My son, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord, Nor faint when you are reproved by Him; 6 For those whom the Lord loves He disciplines, And He scourges every son whom He receives." 7 It is for discipline that you endure; God deals with you as with sons; for what son is there whom his father does not discipline? 8 But if you are without discipline, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate children and not sons. 9 Furthermore, we had earthly fathers to discipline us, and we respected them; shall we not much rather be subject to the Father of spirits, and live? 10 For they disciplined us for a short time as seemed best to them, but He disciplines us for our good, so that we may share His holiness. 11 All discipline for the moment seems not to be joyful, but sorrowful; yet to those who have been trained by it, afterwards it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness. 12 Therefore, strengthen the hands that are weak and the knees that are feeble, (NASB).

The Servitude to Masters (1 Tim. 6:1-2; cf. Col. 3:22-25).

> 1 Timothy 6:1-2 ... 1 All who are under the **yoke** as slaves are to regard their own masters as worthy of all honor so that the name of God and our doctrine will not be spoken against. 2 Those who have believers as their masters must not be disrespectful to them because they are brethren, but must serve them all the more, because those who partake of the benefit are believers and beloved. Teach and preach these principles (NASB).

> Colossians 3:22-25 ... 22 Slaves, in all things obey those who are your masters on earth, not with external service, as those who merely please men, but with sincerity of heart, fearing the Lord. 23 Whatever you do, do your work heartily, as for the Lord rather than for men, 24 knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the inheritance. It is the Lord Christ whom you serve. 25 For he who does wrong will receive the consequences of the wrong which he has done, and that without partiality (NASB).

## The Yoke of Spiritual Servitude

The Servitude of Sin (Isa. 58:1-12; Jer. 2:20-22; 5:4-6; Lam. 1:14).

> Isaiah 58:1-12 ... 1 "Cry loudly, do not hold back; Raise your voice like a trumpet, And declare to My people their transgression And to the house of Jacob their sins. 2 "Yet they seek Me day by day and delight to know My ways, As a nation that has done righteousness And has not forsaken the ordinance of their God. They ask Me for just decisions, They delight in the nearness of God. 3 'Why have we fasted and You do not see? Why have we humbled ourselves and You do not notice?' Behold, on the day of your fast you find your desire, And drive hard all your workers. 4 "Behold, you fast for contention and strife and to strike with a wicked fist. You do not fast like you do today to make your voice heard on high. 5 "Is it a fast like this which I choose, a day for a man to humble himself? Is it for bowing one's head like a reed And for spreading out sackcloth and ashes as a bed? Will you call this a fast, even an acceptable day to the Lord? 6 "Is this not the fast which I choose, To loosen the bonds of wickedness, To undo the bands of the **yoke**, And to let the oppressed go free And break every **yoke**? 7 "Is it not to divide your bread with the hungry And bring the homeless poor into the house; When you see the naked, to cover him; And not to hide yourself from your own flesh? 8 "Then your light will break out like the dawn, And your recovery will speedily spring forth; And your righteousness will go before you; The glory of the Lord will be your rear guard. 9 "Then you will call, and the Lord will answer; You will cry, and He will say, 'Here I am.' If you remove the **yoke** from your midst, The pointing of the finger and speaking wickedness, 10 And if you give yourself to the hungry And satisfy the desire of the afflicted, Then your light will rise in darkness And your gloom will become like midday. 11 "And the Lord will continually guide you, And satisfy your desire in scorched places, And give strength to your bones; And you will be like a watered garden, And like a spring of water whose waters do not fail. 12 "Those from among you will rebuild the ancient ruins; You will raise up the age-old foundations; And you will be called the repairer of the breach, The restorer of the streets in which to dwell (NASB).

> Jeremiah 2:20-22 ... 20 "For long ago I broke your **yoke** And tore off your bonds; But you said, 'I will not serve!' For on every high hill And under every green tree You have lain down as a harlot. 21 "Yet I planted you a choice vine, A completely faithful seed. How then have you turned yourself before Me Into the degenerate shoots of a foreign vine? 22 "Although you wash yourself with lye And use much soap, The stain of your iniquity is before Me," declares the Lord God (NASB).

> Jeremiah 5:4-6 ... 4 Then I said, "They are only the poor, They are foolish; For they do not know the way of the Lord Or the ordinance of their God. 5 "I will go to the great And will speak to them, For they know the way of the Lord And the ordinance of their God." But they too, with one accord, have broken the **yoke** And burst the bonds. 6 Therefore a lion from the forest will slay them, A wolf of the deserts will destroy them, A leopard is watching their cities. Everyone who goes out of them will be torn in pieces, Because their transgressions are many, Their apostasies are numerous (NASB).

> Lamentations 1:14 ... 14 "The **yoke** of my transgressions is bound; By His hand they are knit together. They have come upon my neck; He has made my strength fail. The Lord has given me into the hands Of those against whom I am not able to stand (NASB).

The Servitude of False Doctrine/Practice (Acts 15:1-2, 6-11; Gal. 5:1-6; 2 Cor. 6:14-18; Deut. 22:9-11).

> Acts 15:1-2 ... 1 Some men came down from Judea and began teaching the brethren, "Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved." 2 And when Paul and Barnabas had great dissension and debate with them, the brethren determined that Paul and Barnabas and some others of them should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders concerning this issue (NASB).

> Acts 15:6-11 ... 6 The apostles and the elders came together to look into this matter. 7 After there had been much debate, Peter stood up and said to them, "Brethren, you know that in the early days God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles would hear the word of the gospel and believe. 8 "And God, who knows the heart, testified to them giving them the Holy Spirit, just as He also did to us; 9 and He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith. 10 "Now therefore why do you put God to the test by placing upon the neck of the disciples a **yoke** which neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear? 11 "But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same way as they also are." (NASB).

> Galatians 5:1-6 ... 1 It was for freedom that Christ set us free; therefore keep standing firm and do not be subject again to a **yoke** of slavery. 2 Behold I, Paul, say to you that if you receive circumcision, Christ will be of no benefit to you. 3 And I testify again to every man who receives circumcision, that he is under obligation to keep the whole Law. 4 You have been severed from Christ, you who are seeking to be justified by law; you have fallen from grace. 5 For we through the Spirit, by faith, are waiting for the hope of righteousness. 6 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything, but faith working through love (NASB).

> 2 Corinthians 6:14-18 ... 14 Do not be **bound \*together** with unbelievers; for what partnership have righteousness and lawlessness, or what fellowship has light with darkness? 15 Or what harmony has Christ with Belial, or what has a believer in common with an unbeliever? 16 Or what agreement has the temple of God with idols? For we are the temple of the living God; just as God said, "I will dwell in them and walk among them; And I will be their God, and they shall be My people. 17 "Therefore, come out from their midst and be separate," says the Lord. "And do not touch what is unclean; And I will welcome you. 18 "And I will be a father to you, And you shall be sons and daughters to Me," Says the Lord Almighty (NASB).

> Deuteronomy 22:9-11 ... 9 "You shall not sow your vineyard with two kinds of seed, or all the produce of the seed which you have sown and the increase of the vineyard will become defiled. 10 "You shall not plow with an ox and a donkey together. 11 "You shall not wear a material mixed of wool and linen together (NASB).

The Servitude to God/Christ (Isa. 9:1-7; Jer. 30:8-11; Ezek. 34:25-31; Hos. 11:1-4).

> Isaiah 9:1-7 ... 1 But there will be no more gloom for her who was in anguish; in earlier times He treated the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali with contempt, but later on He shall make it glorious, by the way of the sea, on the other side of Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles. 2 The people who walk in darkness Will see a great light; Those who live in a dark land, The light will shine on them. 3 You shall multiply the nation, You shall increase their gladness; They will be glad in Your presence As with the gladness of harvest, As men rejoice when they divide the spoil. 4 For You shall break the **yoke** of their burden and the staff on their shoulders, The rod of their oppressor, as at the battle of Midian. 5 For every boot of the booted warrior in the battle tumult, And cloak rolled in blood, will be for burning, fuel for the fire. 6 For a child will be born to us, a son will be given to us; And the government will rest on His shoulders; And His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace. 7 There will be no end to the increase of His government or of peace, On the throne of David and over his kingdom, To establish it and to uphold it with justice and righteousness From then on and forevermore. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will accomplish this (NASB).

> Jeremiah 30:8-11 ... 8 'It shall come about on that day,' declares the Lord of hosts, 'that I will break his **yoke** from off their neck and will tear off their bonds; and strangers will no longer make them their slaves. 9 'But they shall serve the Lord their God and David their king, whom I will raise up for them. 10 'Fear not, O Jacob My servant,' declares the Lord, 'And do not be dismayed, O Israel; For behold, I will save you from afar And your offspring from the land of their captivity. And Jacob will return and will be quiet and at ease, And no one will make him afraid. 11 'For I am with you,' declares the Lord, 'to save you; For I will destroy completely all the nations where I have scattered you, Only I will not destroy you completely. But I will chasten you justly And will by no means leave you unpunished.' (NASB).

> Ezekiel 34:25-31 ... 25 "I will make a covenant of peace with them and eliminate harmful beasts from the land so that they may live securely in the wilderness and sleep in the woods. 26 "I will make them and the places around My hill a blessing. And I will cause showers to come down in their season; they will be showers of blessing. 27 "Also the tree of the field will yield its fruit and the earth will yield its increase, and they will be secure on their land. Then they will know that I am the Lord, when I have broken the bars of their **yoke** and have delivered them from the hand of those who enslaved them. 28 "They will no longer be a prey to the nations, and the beasts of the earth will not devour them; but they will live securely, and no one will make them afraid. 29 "I will establish for them a renowned planting place, and they will not again be victims of famine in the land, and they will not endure the insults of the nations anymore. 30 "Then they will know that I, the Lord their God, am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are My people," declares the Lord God. 31 "As for you, My sheep, the sheep of My pasture, you are men, and I am your God," declares the Lord God (NASB).

> Hosea 11:1-4 ... 1 When Israel was a youth I loved him, And out of Egypt I called My son. 2 The more they called them, The more they went from them; They kept sacrificing to the Baals And burning incense to idols. 3 Yet it is I who taught Ephraim to walk, I took them in My arms; But they did not know that I healed them. 4 I led them with cords of a man, with bonds of love, And I became to them as one who lifts the yoke from their jaws; And I bent down and fed them (NASB).

## Conclusion

Let us recognize the difference between yokes that are beneficial (i.e., the yoke of youth, the yoke of service to God and man) and yokes that are harmful (i.e., the yoke of sin and false doctrine). The former should be willingly embraced; the later should be deliberately shunned (Matt. 11:28-30).

> Matthew 11:28-30 ... 28 "Come to Me, all who are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest. 29 "Take My **yoke** upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. 30 "For My **yoke** is easy and My burden is light." (NASB).

> 
