---
layout: post
title: Servants, Ministers, and Deacons
date: 2011-08-21 17:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Deacons, Ministers, Servants]
---
<h3>Servants, Ministers and Deacons</h3>  <p><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />8/23/2011</b></p>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>The Greek word <i>diakonos</i>, translated “servant,” “minister” or “deacon,” generally refers to one who provides assistance to another person. It also describes an agent or intermediary, or one who serves a superior. </p>  <h4>Incidental Examples</h4>  <p>This word is used of royal <b>servants</b> in Jesus’ parable of the wedding feast (Matt. 22:13). It is also used of those <b>servants</b> who waited upon guests at the wedding feast in Cana of Galilee (John 2:5, 9). It is used rhetorically by Paul, when he said, “But if, while seeking to be justified in Christ, we ourselves have also been found sinners, is Christ then a <b>minister</b> of sin? May it never be!” (Gal. 2:17).</p>  <h4>Negative Examples</h4>  <p>It is used of the false teachers, who are – in fact – <b>servants</b> of Satan rather than <b>servants</b> of Christ (2 Cor. 11:15, 23).</p>  <h4>Positive Examples</h4>  <p>It is used of the Lord Jesus Christ who is described as “a <b>servant</b> to the circumcision on behalf of the truth of God” (Rom. 15:8). It is used of civil government, which is twice described as “a <b>minister</b> of God” for good and an avenger who brings wrath on the one who practices evil (Rom. 13:4). It is used of the apostle Paul who is repeatedly described as a <b>servant</b> of the saints, a <b>servant</b> of the new covenant, and a <b>servant/minister</b> of God (1 Cor. 3:5; 2 Cor. 3:6; 6:4; Eph. 3:7; Col. 1:23, 25). It is used of Epaphras who is described as “a faithful <b>servant</b> of Christ” (Col. 1:7). It is used of Tychicus who is described as “a faithful <b>servant/minister</b>” of the Lord (Col. 4:7; Eph. 6:21). It is used of Timothy, who is exhorted to be “a good <b>servant</b> of Christ Jesus” (1 Tim. 4:6). It is used of Phoebe who is described as “a <b>servant</b> of the church which is at Cenchrea” (Rom. 16:1). Finally, it is used of those who hold the office of a <b>deacon</b> (Phil. 1:1; 1 Tim. 3:8, 12).</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>Those who wish to be identified as faithful servants of Jesus Christ must cultivate certain essential attitudes. Being a faithful servant requires obedience (John 12:26). Being a faithful servant requires humility (Matt. 20:26; 23:11). Being a faithful servant requires a respect for the Inspired Message of Truth (1 Tim. 4:6).</p>
