---
layout: post
title: Strange Things
date: 2011-09-25 10:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Morality, Obedience, Worship]
---
<h3><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />9/25/2011</b></h3>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>In this lesson, we focus upon the strange fire offered by Nadab and Abihu, the strange gods worshipped by apostate Israel, the strange women pursued by immoral men, and the strange things seen by drunkards. These activities represent corruption of the spiritual and the secular realms, distortions of worship and debasements of everyday life. </p>  <h4>Distortions of Worship</h4>  <p><b>Improper Forms </b>Offering “strange fire” to the Lord, Nadab and Abihu set aside the divine pattern, and substituted an unauthorized form of worship (Lev. 10:1-7; cf. Exod. 30:1-10; Lev. 16:1-19; 1 Chron. 6:49). In the present Christian dispensation, we must worship according to the prescribed manner: singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord (Eph. 5:18-19; Col. 3:16), praying to the Father through the Son (Acts 12:1-5; Phil. 4:6-7), preaching the inspired message of truth (Acts 2:42; Col. 1:21-23), and specifically on the first day of the week, giving to further the work of the church (1 Cor. 16:1-2; 2 Cor. 9:6-7), and memorializing the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus through the Lord’s Supper (Acts 20:7; 1 Cor. 11:23-30).</p>  <p><b>Improper Objects </b>Turning aside to “strange gods,” apostate Israel ignored the exclusivity of the One True God, and substituted unacceptable objects of worship (Deut. 31:16-18; 32:15-18; Psa. 44:20-21; 81:8-10). In the Gospel age, let us worship and serve God alone, turning away from all forms of idolatry (Matt. 4:8-10; 6:24; Eph. 5:5-6; Col. 3:5; 1 Thess. 1:8-10; James 4:4-5).</p>  <h4>Debasements of Life</h4>  <p><b>Improper Relationships </b>Turning aside to “strange women,” foolish men set aside the divine pattern for marriage, and indulge in improper relationships (Prov. 2:16-22; 5:3-20; 6:23-35; 7:5-23; 22:14; 23:27-28). The New Testament echoes these same themes, warning against sins of sexual immorality, stressing the sanctity of marriage (Matt. 5:27-32; 19:3-9; Rom. 13:12-14; Gal. 5:19-23; Heb. 13:4). </p>  <p><b>Improper Judgments </b>Turning aside to drunkenness, and thus seeing “strange things,” foolish men set aside God’s pattern of responsible sobriety, and indulge in improper and intemperate judgments (Prov. 23:29-35; cf.; Lev. 10:8-11; Prov. 20:1; 31:4-7; Isa. 5:11-12; 5:20-22; 28:1-8). Our Lord Jesus Christ and His inspired apostles also condemn such and communicate the need for sober thought and conduct (Matt. 24:48-51; Rom. 13:11-14; Eph. 5:15-19; 1 Thess. 5:4-11; 1 Tim. 5:23; 1 Pet. 4:1-8). </p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p><a name="_GoBack"></a>Many reject the Lord’s will regarding worship, ridiculing the necessity of obedience. Yet, God is the Potter; we are the clay. He has the right to define the form of acceptable worship. Respecting divine revelation, let us not count God’s Law as a strange thing, but acknowledge the authority of such (Hos. 8:11-14).</p>  <p>Many repudiate the Lord’s authority regarding personal morality, mocking the value of pure and temperate behavior. Yet, God is the Creator; we are the creation. He has the right to direct our daily walk. Accepting the necessity of sacrifice and suffering, let us not count persecution as a strange thing, but acknowledge the inevitability of such (1 Pet. 4:12-19).</p>
