---
layout: post
title: Permitted and Prohibited Foods
date: 2011-08-07 10:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Food, New Testament, Old Testament, Romans 14]
---
<h3>Prohibited Foods: “You Shall Not Eat…”</h3>  <p><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />8/7/2011</b></p>  <h4>During the Patriarchal Age</h4>  <p>In the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve were not permitted to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil (Gen. 2:16-17; 3:1-3, 17-19)</p>  <p>Establishing the covenant of the rainbow with Noah, God permitted the general consumption of meat, but prohibited the eating of blood (Gen. 9:1-7). This prohibition is carried forward through both the Mosaic and Christian dispensations, emphasizing an eternal principle (which ultimately points to Jesus Christ), namely, life is in the blood (Lev. 19:26; Deut. 12:16, 23-25; 15:23; Acts 15:19-20, 28-29).</p>  <h4>During the Mosaic Age</h4>  <p>In the Mosaic Age, the Hebrew people were governed by detailed regulations regarding food. Certain restrictions related to religious observances, such as the use of leaven during the Passover/Feast of Unleaven Bread (Exod. 12:18-20; Deut. 16:1-3). Others related to daily food, distinguishing between the clean and the unclean, i.e., edible creatures and creatures that were not to be eaten (Exod. 22:31; Lev. 3:14-17; 7:22-27; 11:1ff; Deut. 14:3-21).</p>  <h4>During the Christian Age</h4>  <p>Except for the prohibition against the consumption of blood (see above), the Mosaic distinctions between clean and unclean foods are not applicable to the Christian dispensation. The Law of Moses is has been taken out of the way and nailed to the cross (Eph. 2:11-16; Col. 2:13-15; Heb. 9:11-28; 10:4-18). </p>  <p>The Gospel of Christ, which expresses God’s sovereign will in the present era, makes no distinction between meats, but declares all foods clean (Matt. 15:10-11; Mark 7:14-23; Acts 10:9-16; Rom. 14:14, 20; 1 Cor. 10:23-26; 1 Tim. 4:4-5; Titus 1:15).</p>  <p>However, please note the distinction between the circumstances of eating meat in one’s own home (1 Cor. 10:23-26), in an idol’s temple (1 Cor. 8:1-13; 10:14-22), and in the house of an unbeliever (1 Cor. 10:27-33).</p>  <p>Consumption of meat is permitted, but we must be mindful of our influence upon one another, and not behave in such a manner that would cause our brother to stumble; specifically, by pressuring a weaker Christian to act in a way that would violate his conscience (Rom. 14:13-23; 1 Cor. 8:4-13; 10:18-33).</p>  <p>We must also avoid altering the gospel of Christ, through binding regulations that were unique to the Old Testament, through binding our personal scruples upon brethren, or through the sin of adding to, subtracting from, or otherwise changing the covenant of Christ (Gal. 1:6-9; Col. 2:16-23; 1 Tim. 4:1-5).</p>
