---
layout: post
title: Faith and Folly
date: 2011-09-18 10:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Hezekiah, Physical Sickness, Spiritual Sickness]
---
<p><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />9/18/2011</b></p>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>The account of King Hezekiah’s illness is recorded thrice (2 Kings 20:1-21; 2 Chron. 32:24-33; Isa. 38:1-22). The text speaks of both physical and spiritual sickness. The former is an expression of faith, the latter an expression of folly. </p>  <h4>Physical Sickness</h4>  <p>Hezekiah became mortally ill (2 Kings 20:1; 2 Chron. 32:24; Isa. 38:1). Later, we learn this was connected with a serious boil, that was subsequently cured through the power of prayer and the application of a cake of figs (i.e., a poultice) to the inflamed and infected area (cf. 2 Kings 20:7; Isa. 38:21). </p>  <p>The prophet Isaiah came to Hezekiah, saying, “Set your house in order, for you shall die and not live.” All shall die, but not all are given such an advance warning. Accordingly, while Isaiah’s message brought grief, it was also a source of blessing, giving the king the chance to prepare to meet God. Since the future is uncertain, we should be prepared, both for our own death and the Lord’s promised return (Prov. 27:1; Amos 4:11-13; Luke 12:35-40).</p>  <h5>Hezekiah’s Prayer &amp; God’s Answer</h5>  <p>Hearing this sentence, Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, prayed and wept bitterly: “Remember now, O Lord, I beseech You, how I have walked before You in truth and with a whole heart and have done what is good in Your sight” (2 Kings 20:2-3; 2 Chron. 32:24; Isa. 38:2-3). The depth of his despair is conveyed in a writing of Hezekiah that was penned after his illness and recovery (Isaiah 38:9-22).</p>  <p>Proving that the prayer of a righteous man avails much (James 5:16-18), God heard and answered Hezekiah’s plea: “I have heard your prayer, I have seen your tears; behold, I will add fifteen years to your life. I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city” (2 Kings 20:4-7; Isa. 38:4-6).</p>  <h5>Hezekiah’s Request &amp; God’s Sign</h5>  <p>In response to Hezekiah’s request, God provided a remarkable sign: the sun’s shadow on the stairway went backward ten steps (2 Kings 20:8-11; Isa. 38:7-8). While this incident is obviously miraculous, demonstrating divine power over the physical realm, it is not subject to empirical testing, and thus must be accepted by faith. Some have foolishly sought to “prove” Joshua’s long day, along with this incident, by saying, “Scientists have discovered a missing 24 hours.” Such assertions assume points of reference and precision of measurement not possessed by mortal man. While the heavens declare the glory of God, and the creation affirms a Creator, we still walk by faith and not by sight (Psa. 19:1-6; 2 Cor. 5:6-8; Heb. 11:1). </p>  <h4>Spiritual Sickness</h4>  <h5>Hezekiah’s Sin &amp; God’s Wrath</h5>  <p>Unfortunately, this story ends in sadness. God answered the king’s prayer, granting him an additional fifteen years of life, providing a dramatic sign of confirmation. However, “Hezekiah gave no return for the benefit he received, because his heart was proud; therefore wrath came on him and on Judah and Jerusalem” (2 Chron. 32:24-26). </p>  <p>Pride is one of Satan’s most effective tools, sometimes going hand-in-hand with the lust of the flesh and the eyes, sometimes existing separately (1 John 2:15-17; Gen. 3:1-7; Prov. 11:2; 16:18; 18:12). In Hezekiah’s case, it was reflected in his vainglorious reaction to representatives from the king of Babylon, when he foolishly showed them his accumulated treasures (2 Kings 20:12-21; Isa. 39:1-8).</p>  <h5>Hezekiah’s Repentance &amp; God’s Mercy</h5>  <p>Divine wrath was directed at Hezekiah, Judah and Jerusalem. Yet, the king repented, humbling the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. As a result, the wrath of the Lord did not come on them in the days of Hezekiah (2 Chron. 32:24-26).</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>Important lessons may be learned from both Hezekiah’s faith and his folly. Let us appropriate his courage and conviction, while avoiding the perversity of pride (Gal. 6:14; 1 Cor. 1:26-31). Let us appreciate the power of prayer, while properly responding to the Lord for His manifold blessings (Deut. 32:3-6; Psa. 116:12-14). </p>
