---
layout: post
title: The Courage of Hezekiah
date: 2011-09-11 10:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Courage, Hezekiah, Islam]
---
<p><b>By Mark Mayberry      <br />9/11/2011</b></p>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>In 722 B.C., the northern ten tribes of Israel were carried away into Assyrian captivity (2 Kings 17:6-18). This tragedy occurred because they did evil in the sight of the Lord, turning aside from the right way, following the customs of the nations, serving idols, provoking Jehovah God unto anger. During this time, Hezekiah ascended to the throne of David in Judah (2 Kings 18:1-6). </p>  <h4>Preparation</h4>  <p>Because Hezekiah instituted much-needed spiritual reforms, the Lord was with him, and he was blessed with prosperity (2 Kings 18:7-12). Anticipating continued Assyrian aggression, Hezekiah undertook extensive preparations designed to help Jerusalem withstand a siege (2 Chron. 32:1-8). </p>  <h4>Peril</h4>  <p>In the 14th year of Hezekiah’s reign, Sennacherib king of Assyria invaded Judah, seizing the fortified cities, demanding tribute of Hezekiah (2 Kings 18:13-16). Hezekiah’s acquiescence accomplished nothing. Proving that tyrants cannot be appeased, the king of Assyria sent ambassadors to Jerusalem, demanding complete capitulation (2 Kings 18:17-25). Speaking in the common language of the people, publically so that all could hear, these representatives warned of impending disaster, should Jerusalem continue to resist (2 Kings 18:26-27, 28-35, 36-37). </p>  <h4>Prayer</h4>  <p>When Hezekiah heard these taunting threats, he tore his garments, covering himself with sackcloth. Entering the house of the Lord, he prayed to God for deliverance (2 Kings 19:1-7). The king of Assyria’s representatives made additional demands, mocking Hezekiah’s reliance upon God (2 Kings 19:8-13). After reading this blasphemous message, Hezekiah went up to the temple. Spreading the letter out before the Lord, Hezekiah prayed to God for deliverance (2 Kings 19:14-19).</p>  <h4>Providence</h4>  <p>Answering through the prophet Isaiah, God said, “Because you have prayed to Me about Sennacherib king of Assyria, I have heard you…” (2 Kings 19:20-28). The faithful remnant would enjoy future prosperity; their faithless enemies would suffer humiliation. God said, “I will defend this city to save it for My own sake and for My servant David’s sake” (2 Kings 19:29-34). That very night the angel of the Lord went out and struck 185,000 in the camp of the Assyrians; and when men rose early in the morning, behold, all of them were dead (2 Kings 19:35-37; 2 Chron. 32:20-23).</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>On this special day of spiritual remembrance, let us recall the Lord’s victory over sin and death; on this special day of national remembrance, let us soberly reflect upon life’s realities. As Hezekiah was engaged in long-running conflict with Assyria, our country is engaged in a long war with Islamofascism; so likewise, Christians are engaged in a life-long war with Satan. Accommodation and appeasement are never successful; militant opposition is the only viable option; yet, by trusting in God and obeying His will, victory is assured (Rom. 16:19-20; Eph. 6:11-20).</p>
