---
layout: post
title: Edification
date: 2011-08-21 10:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Edification, Work of Church]
---
<h3>Edification</h3>  <p><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />8/21/2011</b></p>  <p>The Greek word <i>oikodomē</i>, oft translated “edification,” describes the process of building, either literally, i.e., the construction of a physical structure, or figuratively, i.e., the edification/upbuilding of God’s spiritual house. </p>  <h4>Physical Buildings</h4>  <p>The word is used literally of physical buildings, specifically the Temple of Herod (Matt. 24:1; Mark 13:1, 2). King Herod used his many building projects to curry favor with the Jewish people and to provide an enduring legacy. Yet, he failed to distinguish between value and vanity (Prov. 22:1; Psa. 103:15–16).</p>  <h4>Spiritual Buildings</h4>  <p>The word is also used figuratively of the building up of the body of Christ, either collectively or individually. The church is God’s building (1 Cor. 3:6-9) that grows into a holy temple in the Lord (Eph. 2:19-22). The responsibility of building up the body of Christ falls upon those who occupy divinely authorized offices (2 Cor. 10:8; 12:19; 13:10; Eph. 4:11-12) and upon each individual member (Rom. 14:19; 15:2; Eph. 4:16; 4:29). Spiritual gifts played a significant, if temporary, role in this regard (1 Cor. 14:3, 5, 12, 26).</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>It takes a great deal more staying-power and skill to be a home-builder than a home-wrecker. Are you engaged in actions that build up or tear down? Are you seeking to edify your physical and spiritual families? If we are faithful, ultimately we will enjoy a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens (2 Cor. 5:1-11). Are you preparing for eternity or are you procrastinating? Earthly happiness and eternal reward hang in the balance.</p>  <h4>Thought Questions</h4>  <p>1. Is the church a physical or spiritual structure?</p>  <p>2. What sort of actions can destroy a family?</p>  <p>3. What sort of actions can destroy a local church?</p>  <p>4. What can I do to build up my family?</p>  <p>5. What can I do to build up the body of Christ?</p>
