---
layout: post
title: Fools &amp; Foolishness
date: 2012-02-12 11:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Foolishness, Fools]
---
<h3><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />2/12/2012</b></h3>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>In this lesson, let us consider the New Testament teaching on fools and foolishness. Just as there is a proper and improper usage of the word “damn,” there is also a proper and improper usage of the word “fool.” Avoiding crudity and crassness, let us approach this subject with caution and clarity. </p>  <p>Thomas defines the root adjective <i>mōros</i> as a primary word, meaning “dull, stupid, foolish” [3474]. BDAG say it refers to that which is “foolish, stupid,” and is used of both persons and of things. </p>  <p>Thomas defines the noun <i>mōria</i> as from <i>mōros</i> [3474], meaning “foolishness” [3472]. BDAG say it refers to “foolishness, generally of worldly wisdom.” </p>  <p>Thomas defines the verb <i>mōrainō</i> as from <i>mōros</i> [3474], meaning “to be foolish” [3471]. BDAG say it means to “(1) make foolish, show to be foolish; (2) make tasteless, become tasteless, insipid, of salt.”</p>  <p>Thomas defines the related noun<b> </b><i>mōrologia</i>, a compound of <i>mōros</i> [foolish] and <i>legō</i> [to speak], meaning “foolish talking” [3473]. BDAG say this word refers to “foolish/silly talk.”</p>  <h4>Foolish Actions</h4>  <p>We must avoid the foolishness of not laying the proper foundation of obedience (Matt. 7:24-27). We must avoid the foolishness of not fulfilling our duty (Matt 5:13-16; Luke 14:34-35). We must avoid the foolishness of being unprepared for the Lord’s return (Matt. 25:1-13).</p>  <h4>Foolish Attitudes</h4>  <p>We must avoid the foolishness of rejecting the revelation of nature (Rom. 1:18-23). We must avoid the foolishness of rejecting the revelation of Scripture (1 Cor. 2:12-16).</p>  <h4>Foolish Words</h4>  <p>We must avoid the foolishness of uttering derogatory insults (Matt. 5:21-26; 1 Cor. 4:8-10; cf. James 3:5-12). We must avoid the foolishness of making false oaths (Matt. 23:16-22). We must avoid the foolishness of filthy and silly talk (Eph. 5:3-5). We must avoid the foolishness of engaging in needless controversy (2 Tim. 2:23-26; Titus 3:8-11).</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>While the gospel message is counted as foolishness by unbelievers, it is actually a demonstration of divine wisdom (1 Cor. 1:18-31). So, do you seek the favor of men or of God (1 Cor. 3:18-23; cf. Gal. 1:10)?</p>
