---
layout: post
title: Building Our House
date: 2012-02-19 11:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Growth, Growth, Church, Growth, Individual]
---
<h3><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />2/19/2012</b></h3>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>God has defined and established the physical family (Gen. 2:18-24; Eph. 5:22-33). Jesus Christ has also established His spiritual family (Matt. 16:13-19; 1 Tim. 3:14-15).</p>  <h4>Building Our Personal House</h4>  <p>If we hope to achieve happiness and enjoy God’s blessings, our family relationships must be established according to divine precepts (Psa. 127:1-5). Those who walk according to wisdom are richly blessed; those who reject the same suffer the consequences of their stubbornness (Prov. 9:1-12). </p>  <p>Contrasting the upright and the wicked, Solomon said, “The wise woman builds her house, but the foolish tears it down with her own hands” (Prov. 14:1-2). Again, Proverbs 24:3-4 says, “By wisdom a house is built, and by understanding it is established; and by knowledge the rooms are filled with all precious and pleasant riches.” Accordingly, let us build our homes with wisdom, living in harmony with God’s righteousness (Psa. 128:1-6; Prov. 31:10-31).</p>  <p>Circumstances may at times be undesirable. We may not be able to live where we desire, or with the comforts to which we previously grew accustomed. Yet, God calls us to make the best of our circumstances, being productive, evidencing contentment, taking solace in his promises and provision (Jer. 29:4-14; Matt. 6:25-34; Phil. 4:4-9).</p>  <h4>Building Our Spiritual House</h4>  <p>Restoration and rebuilding are part of God’s eternal purpose. Amos anticipated the eventual restoration of Israel. God said, “In that day I will raise up the fallen booth of David, and wall up its breaches; I will also raise up its ruins and rebuild it as in the days of old…” (Amos 9:11-15). Zechariah prophesied concerning Jesus Christ, saying, “Behold, a man whose name is Branch, for He will branch out from where He is; and He will build the temple of the Lord. Yes, it is He who will build the temple of the Lord, and He who will bear the honor and sit and rule on His throne…” (Zech. 6:11-13).</p>  <p>Restoration and rebuilding require truth. In contrast with the effectual power of divine truth, proponents of error are entirely unproductive: “‘Behold, I am against those who have prophesied false dreams and related them and led My people astray by their falsehoods and reckless boasting; yet I did not send them or command them, nor do they furnish this people the slightest benefit,’ declares the Lord” (Jer. 23:25-32). Denouncing the foolish prophets who followed their own spirit but received no revelation from above, Ezekiel said, “O Israel, your prophets have been like foxes among ruins. You have not gone up into the breaches, nor did you build the wall around the house of Israel to stand in the battle on the day of the Lord” (Ezek. 13:1-7). In the Christian era, the acceptability of man’s worship is based, not upon location (i.e., this or that mountain), but upon rather attitude and action: “God is spirit, and those who worship Him must worship in spirit and truth” (John 4:19-24). </p>  <p>Restoration and rebuilding require participation: “I planted, Apollos watered, but God was causing the growth. So then neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but God who causes the growth” (1 Cor. 3:5-17). </p>  <p>Restoration and rebuilding require courage: “We are destroying speculations and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and we are taking every thought captive to the obedience of Christ, and we are ready to punish all disobedience, whenever your obedience is complete” (2 Cor. 10:3-11; 13:5-11).</p>  <p>Restoration and rebuilding require compassion: “So then we pursue the things which make for peace and the building up of one another. Do not tear down the work of God for the sake of food” (Rom. 14:13-23). This principle affects our words and deeds (Eph. 4:29-32; 1 Thess. 5:11). </p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>Do you hope for a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens? Are you striving and laboring toward that end (2 Cor. 5:1-11)? Have you come to Him as to a living stone? Are you as living stones, being built up as a spiritual house for a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 2:4-5)? </p>
