---
layout: post
title: What Do You Say Concerning Transgressions of Self?
date: 2012-01-08 11:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Christianity, Sin, Transgression]
---
<h3><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />1/8/2012</b></h3>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>“He that is good for making excuses is seldom good for anything else.” – Benjamin Franklin</p>  <p>“Ninety-nine percent of the failures come from people who have the habit of making excuses.” – George Washington Carver</p>  <p>“An excuse is worse than a lie, for an excuse is a lie, guarded.” – Alexander Pope</p>  <p>“And oftentimes excusing of a fault doth make the fault the worse by the excuse.” – William Shakespeare</p>  <p>“The real man is one who always finds excuses for others, but never excuses himself.” – Henry Ward Beecher</p>  <h4>Wrong Answers</h4>  <p>When Adam sinned, he blamed Eve, and by extension, God the Creator (Gen. 3:8-13). When Aaron sinned, he blamed the people, and by extension, mythical forces of fire (Exod. 32:19-24). When King Saul sinned, he justified himself, and blamed the Israelites (1 Sam. 15:1-3, 10-35).</p>  <h4>Right Answers</h4>  <p>Being rebuked by Nathan the prophet, King David confessed his transgression, saying, “I have sinned” (2 Sam. 12:1-15; cf. also 24:10-14). When the prodigal son came to himself, he humbly returned to his father and said, “I have sinned against heaven and in your sight; I am no longer worthy to be called your son” (Luke 15:11-32). In His teaching on acceptable prayer, Jesus contrasted arrogant self-righteousness with humble self-abasement (Luke 18:9-14).</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>Let us strive to resist temptation, looking for that way of escape that God has promised (1 Cor. 10:13; Eph. 6:10-20; 1 Pet. 1:3-9). However, when we do sin, let us confess and forsake our wrongs (Psa. 32:1-7; Matt. 3:1-6; James 5:16). </p>
