---
layout: post
title: What Do You Say Regarding Creation vs Evolution?
date: 2012-02-26 11:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [Creation, Evolution, Origins]
---
<h3><b>By Mark Mayberry     <br />2/26/2012</b></h3>  <h4>Introduction</h4>  <p>What do you say regarding the issue of origins? The question, “Where did I come from? Also impacts “Why am I here?” and “Where am I going?” Evolution and creation provide two conflicting chronologies. The Bible affirms that God created the universe in six days, while evolution argues that billions and billions of years were involved. Evolution and creation provide two conflicting philosophies. The Bible affirms that the worlds were created with providential purpose, while evolution argues that life is a cosmic accident. Which is a more reasonable explanation of the physical universe?</p>  <h4>What Do You Say Regarding Creation?</h4>  <h5>God’s Glory is Reflected in the Physical Creation</h5>  <p>David declared, “The heavens are telling of the glory of God; and their expanse is declaring the work of His hands (Psa. 19:1-6). The physical creation reveals God’s invisible attributes, i.e., His eternal power and divine nature (Rom. 1:18-20). The writer of Hebrews affirms, “For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God” (Heb. 3:1-6).</p>  <h5>God Spoke the World into Existence</h5>  <p>Genesis 1:1 says, “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” According to the ensuing text, God said, “Let there be light…” God said, “Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters.” God said, “Let the waters below the heavens be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appear.” “Let the earth sprout vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees on the earth bearing fruit after their kind with seed in them.” God said, “Let the waters teem with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of the heavens.” God said, “Let the earth bring forth living creatures after their kind: cattle and creeping things and beasts of the earth after their kind.” God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness…” In every case, the text concludes, “And it was so.” </p>  <h5>Jesus Christ was the Active Agent of Creation</h5>  <p>The Fourth Gospel opens by affirming, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All things came into being through Him, and apart from Him nothing came into being that has come into being.” (John 1:1-3). Again, “He was in the world, and the world was made through Him, and the world did not know Him” (vs. 10). </p>  <p>Contrasting the impotence of idolatry with the omnipotence of Jehovah, Paul said “There is but one God, the Father, from whom are all things and we exist for Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we exist through Him” (1 Cor. 8:4-6). Writing to the Colossians, the apostle extoled the power and position of the Son, saying “By Him all things were created… He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together” (Col. 1:13-17). The writer of Hebrews echoes the same theme: Jesus Christ, the Son of God, made the world, and upholds all things by the word of His power (Heb. 1:1-4). </p>  <h5>God’s Power is Beyond Human Comprehension</h5>  <p>Speaking of Jehovah, Isaiah asked, “Who has measured the waters in the hollow of His hand, and marked off the heavens by the span, and calculated the dust of the earth by the measure, and weighed the mountains in a balance and the hills in a pair of scales?” (Isa. 40:10-17). “To whom then will you liken Me That I would be his equal?” says the Holy One. “Lift up your eyes on high and see who has created these stars, the One who leads forth their host by number…” (Isa. 40:21-26). Again, “Remember the former things long past, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is no one like Me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things which have not been done, saying, ‘My purpose will be established, and I will accomplish all My good pleasure’” (Isa. 46:5-11).</p>  <h4>What Do You Say Regarding Evolution? </h4>  <h5>The Importance of Proper Definitions</h5>  <p>While scientists often affirm, “Evolution is scientifically proven,” reality is otherwise. Terms must be properly defined. In its most basic sense, evolution involves change. Can change be observed in the natural realm? Yes, of course! Yet, there is no evidence for the supposed amoeba-to-man type changes assumed by the general theory of evolution. </p>  <p>The following dictionary definitions of evolution demonstrate the various meanings associated with the word:</p>  <p>· <i>Webster’s Dictionary</i> defines evolution as “(1) one of a set of prescribed movements; (2a) a process of change in a certain direction: UNFOLDING; (2b) the action or an instance of forming and giving something off: EMISSION; (2c) (1): a process of continuous change from a lower, simpler, or worse to a higher, more complex, or better state: GROWTH; (2): a process of gradual and relatively peaceful social, political, and economic advance; (2d) something evolved; (3) the process of working out or developing; (4a) the historical development of a biological group (as a race or species): PHYLOGENY; (4b) a theory that the various types of animals and plants have their origin in other preexisting types and that the distinguishable differences are due to modifications in successive generations; (5) the extraction of a mathematical root; (6) a process in which the whole universe is a progression of interrelated phenomena.”</p>  <p>· <i>The Concise Oxford English Dictionary</i> defines evolution as “(1) the process by which different kinds of living organism are believed to have developed from earlier forms, especially by natural selection; (2) gradual development; (3) Chemistry the giving off of a gaseous product, or of heat; (4) a pattern of movements or manoeuvres; (5) Mathematics, dated the extraction of a root from a given quantity.”</p>  <p>What is meant by “The General Theory of Evolution”? Gerald A. Kerkut, noted British zoologist and physiologist, says it describes the theory that all the living forms in the world have arisen from a single source which itself came from an inorganic form. </p>  <h5>The General Theory of Evolution is Inherently Speculative, and is Not Observable in Nature</h5>  <p>The general theory of evolution is inherently speculative, and is not observable in nature. A basic requirement of empirical science is that the object/phenomenon/theory under consideration must be observable and repeatable. Yet, no one has ever witnessed the evolution of a fundamentally new organism of a higher taxonomic group arising from a lower taxonomic group. </p>  <p>Variation within a species is clearly observable, but there are limits to such change. Through selective breeding, we can observe changes within certain kinds of animals, but there are always limits to change and variation. Through selective breeding of dogs, men can produce everything from a Great Dane to a Chihuahua, but not cats or canary’s. Through laboratory experiments, countless generations of fruit flies have been subjected to high levels of radiation, causing amazing mutational change. Yet, they are still fruit flies. Furthermore, they the mutations are almost always detrimental and digressive. </p>  <p>Another useful comparison would be the difference between macro-evolution versus micro-evolution. Macroevolution is evolution on a scale of separated gene pools above the level of a species while micro-evolution refers to smaller changes that occur within a given species. The latter is observable; the former is not. </p>  <h5>Evidence of the General Theory of Evolution Contained in the Fossil Record is Vastly Overstated </h5>  <p>Evidence of the general theory of evolution contained in the fossil record is vastly overstated. The fossil record is a human construct rather than an observable scientific fact. It is often based upon circular reasoning: Evolutionists date the rocks by the fossils and the fossils by the rocks. Also note the absence of transitional life forms in the fossil record. Darwin assumed that continued scientific research would uncover a multitude of transitional life forms demanded by his famous theory. Yet, despite the passage of years, such discoveries have not been forthcoming. </p>  <h5>The General Theory of Evolution is Incompatible with the 2<sup>nd</sup> Law of Thermodynamics</h5>  <p>The general theory of evolution is incompatible with the 2nd law of thermodynamics. This fundamental law of nature is an expression of the tendency that over time, differences in temperature, pressure, and chemical potential equilibrate in an isolated physical system. From the state of thermodynamic equilibrium, the law deduces the principle of the increase of entropy and explains the phenomenon of irreversibility in nature. Put simply, things run down. Order gives way to disorder. Yet, the general theory of evolution is based upon opposite assumptions. </p>  <h5>Similarities of Biological Structures Suggest a Common Designer</h5>  <p>Similarities of biological structures suggest, not a common evolutionary ancestor, but rather a common Intelligent Designer. In the petro-chemical business, engineers and workers can observe which designs work and which do not. If a particular design proves successful, it is often reused over and over. It may be scaled up or down, adapted to different environments, etc. Our Glorious Creator designed very workable systems, such as legs and arms, that serve the needs of man and beast.</p>  <h4>Conclusion</h4>  <p>As previously stated, our view of origin is rooted in revelation, but remains a matter of faith (Heb. 11:1-3). Yet, Christian faith is based upon evidence. In his sermon on Pentecost, Peter appealed to reason, urging his audience to consider the implications of fulfilled prophecy, confirming miracles, and credible eye-witness testimony (Acts 2). In his sermon on Mar’s Hill, Paul affirmed that God created the worlds, but pointed to the resurrection of Christ as providing foundational proof: “God is now declaring to men that all people everywhere should repent, because He has fixed a day in which He will judge the world in righteousness through a Man whom He has appointed, having furnished <b>proof</b> to all men by raising Him from the dead” (Acts 17).</p>
