---
layout: post
title: The Winds

date: 2012-08-12 11:00
author: MarkMayberry
comments: true
categories: [God, Man, Nature, Winds]
---
By Mark Mayberry
8/12/2012

Introduction

Holy Scripture contains many references to the winds (Eccles. 1:6; Matt. 16:1-4; Luke 12:54-56; etc.). According to Nelson’s New Illustrated Bible Dictionary, wind is “the natural movement of air as a part of the weather pattern. The hot, dry climate of Palestine made the winds very important to the Hebrew people. The winds of this region included cool day-time winds, evening sea breezes bearing essential moisture, and hot blasts from the desert.” [NIBD]

Physical Usage

North Wind

“The dry north wind is the coldest wind in Palestine, blowing from June until September. Today the Arabs call this wind the simoom (from samm or ‘poison’). Its combined cold, wind, and heat cause headache, fever, and neuralgia. The ‘north wind’ of Proverbs 25:23 that ‘brings forth rain’ is really the northwest wind.” [NIBD]

South Wind

“The south wind blew Paul’s ship gently (Acts 27:13), before a fiercer wind demolished his ship. God ‘quiets the earth’ with the south wind (Job 37:17). The Arabs call the south wind off the desert sirocco. It blows for about one day at a time during the spring (February-June).” [NIBD]

East Wind

“The violent east wind blows from the desert. This is the wind most often mentioned in the Bible. It scorched the grain (Gen. 41:6, 23, 27), withered the vine (Ezek. 17:9), and parched the fruit (Jon. 4:8). The east wind also brought the plague of locusts (Gen. 10:13). Blowing ‘from the wilderness,’ it dried up the springs of water (Hos. 13:15). Generally, all such violent gusts of wind were attributed to the east. These winds were also called winds of the wilderness. The blast that struck the home of Job’s sons and killed them was probably the east wind (Job 1:19). An east wind from God parted the Red Sea (Ex. 14:21) and shattered the ships of Tarshish (Ps. 48:7). Probably it was an east wind that wrecked Paul’s ship (Acts 27:14).”[NIBD]

West Wind

“The west wind carries moisture from the Mediterranean Sea over Palestine between November and February. A west wind drove off the locusts in Egypt (Ex. 10:19). The rain-bearing west wind also ended a severe drought in the days of the prophet Elijah (1 Kin. 18:43-44).” [NIBD]

Figurative Usage

Associated with the Power of God

Winds are associated with the power of God. The Lord makes the clouds His chariot. Walking upon the wings of the wind, He makes the winds His messengers, and flaming fire His ministers (Psa. 104:1-4). The Lord causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightning for the rain, and brings forth the wind from His treasuries (Psa. 135:5-7). All created things praise the Lord: “Fire and hail, snow and clouds; stormy wind, fulfilling His word…” (Psa. 148:7-12).

Associated with the Judgment of God

Winds are associated with the judgment of God. “Upon the wicked He will rain snares; fire and brimstone and burning wind will be the portion of their cup” (Psa. 11:4-7). Praying for rescue from his enemies, David said, “The Lord tests the righteous and the wicked, and the one who loves violence His soul hates. Upon the wicked He will rain snares; fire and brimstone and burning wind will be the portion of their cup” (Psa. 35:4-6). Offering a similar imprecatory prayer, Asaph implores the Lord to confound his enemies, saying “O my God, make them like the whirling dust, like chaff before the wind… So pursue them with Your tempest and terrify them with Your storm” (Psa. 83:13-15).

Associated with the Spirit of God

Winds are associated with the Spirit of God. Speaking to Nicodemus, Jesus spoke of the necessity of being born again. Yet, Nicodemus comprehended not. Accordingly, Jesus elaborated upon his statement: “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. Do not be amazed that I said to you, ‘You must be born again.’ The wind blows where it wishes and you hear the sound of it, but do not know where it comes from and where it is going; so is everyone who is born of the Spirit” (John 3:1-8). Among other signs, the Spirit’s presence on Pentecost was manifest by the sound of a violent rushing wind (Acts 2:1-4). As we do not always understand the cycles of nature, so we cannot fully understand the working of God. Yet, we observe the evidence of God’s glory in the processes of nature, and in the effect of the Spirit’s teaching upon the soul (Eccles. 11:4-5).

Associated with the Trials of Life

Winds are associated with the trials of life. With an anguished heart, David exclaimed, “Oh, that I had wings like a dove! I would fly away and be at rest… I would hasten to my place of refuge From the stormy wind and tempest” (Psalm 55:4-8). Anticipating a time when Israel would enjoy divine forgiveness, Isaiah spoke of God’s favor as a protective canopy, “a shelter to give shade from the heat by day, and refuge and protection from the storm and the rain” (Isa. 4:4-6). In the parable of the wise and foolish builders, Jesus contrasted the stability of obedient faith with the instability of those who hear but do not obey. Winds and waves come into the life of each, but the effects are dramatically different (Matt. 7:24-27).

Associated with the Brevity of Life

Winds are associated with the brevity of life. The psalmist said, “As for man, his days are like grass; as a flower of the field, so he flourishes. When the wind has passed over it, it is no more, and its place acknowledges it no longer” (Psa. 103:15-18). Isaiah expressed similar sentiments (Isa. 40:6-8). In like manner, James wrote, “You do not know what your life will be like tomorrow. You are just a vapor (breath) that appears for a little while and then vanishes away” (James 4:13-15).

Associated with the Folly of Life

Winds are associated with the folly of life. The wicked are like chaff which the wind drives away (Psa. 1:4-6). He who troubles his own house will inherit wind (Prov. 11:29). Describing earthly activity apart from God, Solomon said, “All is vanity and striving after wind” (Eccles. 1:12-15). The New Testament echoes these thoughts: Those without spiritual conviction are like “a reed shaken by the wind?” (Matt. 11:7-11). Those who turn aside from the truth are “tossed here and there by waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine” (Eph. 4:14-16). Those dominated by doubts are like “the surf of the sea, driven and tossed by the wind” (James 1:5-8).

Conclusion

As disciples of Christ, we follow One possessing such power “that even the winds and the sea obey Him” (Matt. 8:23-27). Do you believe in Him? Have you obeyed Him? Will you faithfully follow Him? 

Source: NIBD = Nelson’s New Illustrated Bible Dictionary, s.v., “Wind.”
