# He Did Not Leave Himself Without Witness

## Video

<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/683511693?h=8dd26d9367&title=0&byline=0" width="640" height="360" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Audio

<figure class="wp-block-audio"><audio controls src="https://markmayberry.net/wp-content/uploads/bible-study/2022-02-27-pm-MM-He-Did-Not-Leave-Himself-without-Witness.mp3"></audio></figure>

## Introduction

What is a witness?

In English, a witness refers to (1) "a person who sees an event, typically a crime or accident, take place," or (2) "evidence, proof" (Oxford's English Dictionary). In other words, in a court of law, an eye-witness offers testimony that serves as evidence. Assuming the testimony is credible, it helps prove the innocence or guilt of one who is on trial.

The Greek word *martus,* translated "witness" (12x) or "witnesses" (23x), carries a similar meaning. It refers to "(1) one who testifies in legal matters; (a) one who affirms or attests, testifier, witness transferred sense of meaning 1, of anyone who can or should testify to anything; (b) of God (or the exalted Christ) as witness; of humans: witnessing by eye and ear; (c) of witnesses who bear a divine message; (3) one who witnesses at cost of life, martyr, in the usage of the persecuted church" (BDAG, 619–620).

What evidence do we have for the existence of God, and the authenticity of His word? What testimony does He offer regarding His existence, goodness, and grace? Why should we believe/trust Him? 

When a financial institution consider a credit card or loan application, it looks at past performance of the applicant. Is he trustworthy? Does he fulfill his commitments? What's his credit rating? Does this person have the resources to make payments? Does he pay their bills, or does the repo man regularly come calling?

We learn to trust God in the same way that we come to trust others, or others come to trust us. What is His track record? Does He have the character/integrity that engenders trust? Does He keep His word? Does He have the resources to carry out His commitments?

## The Witness of World

In preaching to the pagans at Lystra, Paul urged them to turn from idolatry to serve the living God who made heaven and earth. While permitting the nations to go their own way, He did not leave Himself without witness. Rather, God did good, providing rain and fruitful seasons, satisfying our hearts with food and gladness (Acts 14:8-18).

> At Lystra a man was sitting who had no strength in his feet, lame from his mother's womb, who had never walked. This man was listening to Paul as he spoke, who, when he had fixed his gaze on him and had seen that he had faith to be made well, said with a loud voice, "Stand upright on your feet." And he leaped up and began to walk. When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they raised their voice, saying in the Lycaonian language, "The gods have become like men and have come down to us." And they began calling Barnabas, Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, because he was the chief speaker. The priest of Zeus, whose temple was just outside the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and wanted to offer sacrifice with the crowds. But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their robes and rushed out into the crowd, crying out and saying, **"Men, why are you doing these things? We are also men of the same nature as you, and preach the gospel to you that you should turn from these vain things to a living God, WHO MADE THE HEAVEN AND THE EARTH AND THE SEA AND ALL THAT IS IN THEM. In the generations gone by He permitted all the nations to go their own ways; and yet He did not leave Himself without witness, in that He did good and gave you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying your hearts with food and gladness."** Even saying these things, with difficulty they restrained the crowds from offering sacrifice to them (Acts 14:8-18).

Paul presented a similar message to the Greek philosophers while standing on the Areopagus in Athens, emphasizing God's power, provision, and purpose (Acts 17:22-31).

> So Paul stood in the midst of the Areopagus and said, "Men of Athens, I observe that you are very religious in all respects. "For while I was passing through and examining the objects of your worship, I also found an altar with this inscription, 'TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.' Therefore what you worship in ignorance, this I proclaim to you. **The God who made the world and all things in it, since He is Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in temples made with hands; nor is He served by human hands, as though He needed anything, since He Himself gives to all people life and breath and all things; and He made from one man every nation of mankind to live on all the face of the earth, having determined their appointed times and the boundaries of their habitation, that they would seek God, if perhaps they might grope for Him and find Him, though He is not far from each one of us; for in Him we live and move and exist, as even some of your own poets have said, 'For we also are His children.'** Being then the children of God, we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by the art and thought of man. Therefore having overlooked the times of ignorance, God is now declaring to men that all people everywhere should repent, because He has fixed a day in which He will judge the world in righteousness through a Man whom He has appointed, having furnished proof to all men by raising Him from the dead" (Acts 17:22-31).

The opening chapter of Romans offers a similar summary: The physical creation reveals God's eternal attributes, namely His eternal power and divine nature. However, pride, perversity and perversion blind men and women to such self-evident truths (Rom. 1:18-25).

> **For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who suppress the truth in unrighteousness, because that which is known about God is evident within them; for God made it evident to them. For since the creation of the world His invisible attributes, His eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly seen, being understood through what has been made, so that they are without excuse.** For even though they knew God, they did not honor Him as God or give thanks, but they became futile in their speculations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing to be wise, they became fools, and exchanged the glory of the incorruptible God for an image in the form of corruptible man and of birds and four-footed animals and crawling creatures. Therefore God gave them over in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, so that their bodies would be dishonored among them. For they exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen (Rom. 1:18-25).

## The Witness of the Word

Careful obedience to God's revealed words is the key to a happy and productive life (Deut. 32:44-47).

> Then Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he, with Joshua the son of Nun. When Moses had finished speaking all these words to all Israel, he said to them, "Take to your heart all the words with which I am warning you today, which you shall command your sons to observe carefully, even all the words of this law. For it is not an idle word for you; indeed it is your life. And by this word you will prolong your days in the land, which you are about to cross the Jordan to possess" (Deut. 32:44-47).

The benefits of faith become clear through practice: "O taste and see that the LORD is good; how blessed is the man who takes refuge in Him!" (Ps. 34:8–18).

> O taste and see that the LORD is good; How blessed is the man who takes refuge in Him! O fear the LORD, you His saints; For to those who fear Him there is no want. The young lions do lack and suffer hunger; But they who seek the LORD shall not be in want of any good thing. Come, you children, listen to me; I will teach you the fear of the LORD. Who is the man who desires life And loves length of days that he may see good? Keep your tongue from evil And your lips from speaking deceit. Depart from evil and do good; Seek peace and pursue it. The eyes of the LORD are toward the righteous And His ears are open to their cry. The face of the LORD is against evildoers, To cut off the memory of them from the earth. The righteous cry, and the LORD hears And delivers them out of all their troubles. The LORD is near to the brokenhearted And saves those who are crushed in spirit (Ps. 34:8–18).

The word of God cuts through all forms of pretense and posturing, revealing our need, challenging us to act with purpose. To help us achieve the land of promised rest, God has provided a perfect High Priest who graciously guides us toward the goal (Heb. 4:1–16, esp. vv. 12-13).

> “Therefore, let us fear if, while a promise remains of entering His rest, any one of you may seem to have come short of it. For indeed we have had good news preached to us, just as they also; but the word they heard did not profit them, because it was not united by faith in those who heard. For we who have believed enter that rest, just as He has said, “AS I SWORE IN MY WRATH, THEY SHALL NOT ENTER MY REST,” although His works were finished from the foundation of the world. For He has said somewhere concerning the seventh day: “AND GOD RESTED ON THE SEVENTH DAY FROM ALL HIS WORKS”; and again in this passage, “THEY SHALL NOT ENTER MY REST.” Therefore, since it remains for some to enter it, and those who formerly had good news preached to them failed to enter because of disobedience, He again fixes a certain day, “Today,” saying through David after so long a time just as has been said before, “TODAY IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS.” For if Joshua had given them rest, He would not have spoken of another day after that. So there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God. For the one who has entered His rest has himself also rested from his works, as God did from His. Therefore let us be diligent to enter that rest, so that no one will fall, through following the same example of disobedience. **For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart. And there is no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are open and laid bare to the eyes of Him with whom we have to do.** Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession. For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but One who has been tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin. Therefore let us draw near with confidence to the throne of grace, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need (Heb. 4:1–16).

# Conclusion

What evidence do we have that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God? Is there evidence that supports His claims, His deity, and His resurrection? 

Peter's sermon on Pentecost serves as a summation of the gospel's life-saving message: (1) the evidence of miracles; (2) the evidence of prophecy; and (3), the evidence of credible eye-witness testimony.

When the apostles were baptized in the Holy Spirit, three miracles occurred, offering audible, visible, and intellectual confirmation that God's hand was involved in the unfolding events. Those who were present heard the noise of a violent rushing wind, they saw tongues of fire upon each of the apostles, who began speaking in a multitude of languages known to those pilgrims who had come from foreign lands. In like manner, Peter also declared that "Jesus the Nazarene (was) a man attested to you by God with miracles and wonders and signs which God performed through Him in your midst, just as you yourselves know" (vv. 22).

The evidence of prophecy came from Joel, who foreshadowed the outpouring of the Holy Spirit (vv. 14-21), and David, who spoke of the resurrection of the Christ (vv. 22-31) and His subsequent ascension (vv. 34-35).

The evidence of eye-witnesses came from Peter and the other apostles: "This Jesus God raised up again, to which we are all witnesses. “Therefore having been exalted to the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, He has poured forth this which you both see and hear" (v. 32-33).

Near the end of his life, Peter reemphasized the reliability of the gospel message, saying, "For we did not follow cleverly devised tales when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of His majesty--citing the miracles that occurred on the mount of transfiguration, and stressing the powerful witness of the prophetic word (2 Pet. 1:16–21).

> For we did not follow cleverly devised tales when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of His majesty. For when He received honor and glory from God the Father, such an utterance as this was made to Him by the Majestic Glory, “This is My beloved Son with whom I am well-pleased”— and we ourselves heard this utterance made from heaven when we were with Him on the holy mountain. So we have the prophetic word made more sure, to which you do well to pay attention as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star arises in your hearts. But know this first of all, that no prophecy of Scripture is a matter of one’s own interpretation, for no prophecy was ever made by an act of human will, but men moved by the Holy Spirit spoke from God (2 Pet. 1:16–21).

The witness of the world and the witness of the word are combined in Psalm 19. Are you enjoying the benefits and blessings that God provides? Have you tasted the sweetness of salvation? Are you discerning? Have you been acquitted? Are you forgiven? Do you share fellowship with Him?

> The heavens are telling of the glory of God; And their expanse is declaring the work of His hands. Day to day pours forth speech, And night to night reveals knowledge. There is no speech, nor are there words; Their voice is not heard. Their line has gone out through all the earth, And their utterances to the end of the world. In them He has placed a tent for the sun, Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber; It rejoices as a strong man to run his course. Its rising is from one end of the heavens, And its circuit to the other end of them; And there is nothing hidden from its heat. The law of the LORD is perfect, restoring the soul; The testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple. The precepts of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart; The commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring forever; The judgments of the LORD are true; they are righteous altogether. They are more desirable than gold, yes, than much fine gold; Sweeter also than honey and the drippings of the honeycomb. Moreover, by them Your servant is warned; In keeping them there is great reward. Who can discern his errors? Acquit me of hidden faults. Also keep back Your servant from presumptuous sins; Let them not rule over me; Then I will be blameless, And I shall be acquitted of great transgression. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart Be acceptable in Your sight, O LORD, my rock and my Redeemer (Ps. 19:1-14).
