# Integrity vs Dishonesty

By Mark Mayberry
4/24/2022

## Introduction

The faithful of God walk with integrity (Ps. 15:1-5; 26:1-7; Prov. 20:7), but the wicked are lacking in this regard (Isa. 59:1-4; Jer. 9:1-6; Amos 5:10).

> [1] O LORD, who may abide in Your tent? Who may dwell on Your holy hill? [2] He who walks with **integrity,** and works righteousness, And speaks truth in his heart. [3] He does not slander with his tongue, Nor does evil to his neighbor, Nor takes up a reproach against his friend; [4] In whose eyes a reprobate is despised, But who honors those who fear the LORD; He swears to his own hurt and does not change; [5] He does not put out his money at interest, Nor does he take a bribe against the innocent. He who does these things will never be shaken (Ps. 15:1-5).

> [1] Vindicate me, O LORD, for I have walked in my **integrity,** And I have trusted in the LORD without wavering. [2] Examine me, O LORD, and try me; Test my mind and my heart. [3] For Your lovingkindness is before my eyes, And I have walked in Your truth. [4] I do not sit with deceitful men, Nor will I go with pretenders. [5] I hate the assembly of evildoers, And I will not sit with the wicked. [6] I shall wash my hands in innocence, And I will go about Your altar, O LORD, [7] That I may proclaim with the voice of thanksgiving And declare all Your wonders (Ps. 26:1-7).

> [7] A righteous man who walks in his **integrity**---How blessed are his sons after him (Prov. 20:7).

> [1] Behold, the LORD'S hand is not so short That it cannot save; Nor is His ear so dull That it cannot hear. [2] But your iniquities have made a separation between you and your God, And your sins have hidden His face from you so that He does not hear. [3] For your hands are defiled with blood And your fingers with iniquity; Your lips have spoken falsehood, Your tongue mutters wickedness. [4] No one sues righteously and no one pleads honestly. They trust in confusion and speak lies; They conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity (Isa. 59:1-4).

> [1] Oh that my head were waters And my eyes a fountain of tears, That I might weep day and night For the slain of the daughter of my people! [2] Oh that I had in the desert A wayfarers' lodging place; That I might leave my people And go from them! For all of them are adulterers, An assembly of treacherous men. [3] "They bend their tongue like their bow; Lies and not truth prevail in the land; For they proceed from evil to evil, And they do not know Me," declares the LORD. [4] Let everyone be on guard against his neighbor, And do not trust any brother; Because every brother deals craftily, And every neighbor goes about as a slanderer. [5] Everyone deceives his neighbor And does not speak the truth, They have taught their tongue to speak lies; They weary themselves committing iniquity. [6] Your dwelling is in the midst of deceit; Through deceit they refuse to know Me," declares the LORD (Jer. 9:1-6).

> [10] They hate him who reproves in the gate, And they abhor him who speaks with **integrity** (Amos 5:10).

*The Concise Oxford English Dictionary* defines "integrity" as "(1) the quality of having strong moral principles; (2) the state of being whole, i.e., the condition of being unified or sound in construction, or internal consistency, or lack of corruption in electronic data."

*The Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary* defines "integrity" as "(1) firm adherence to a code of especially moral or artistic values: incorruptibility; (2) an unimpaired condition: soundness; (3) the quality or state of being complete or undivided: completeness."

## Why the Lie?

Hide the Truth & Avoid Responsibility

Disguise Disobedience & Shift the Blame

Desire for Friendship & Association

Desire for Praise and Prominence

### Fear and Uncertainty

Like Abraham and Isaac, some lies are rooted in fear and uncertainty (Gen. 12:10-20; 20:1-18; 26:1-11).

> [10] Now there was a famine in the land; so Abram went down to Egypt to sojourn there, for the famine was severe in the land. [11] It came about when he came near to Egypt, that he said to Sarai his wife, "See now, I know that you are a beautiful woman; [12] and when the Egyptians see you, they will say, 'This is his wife'; and they will kill me, but they will let you live. [13] "Please say that you are my sister so that it may go well with me because of you, and that I may live on account of you." [14] It came about when Abram came into Egypt, the Egyptians saw that the woman was very beautiful. [15] Pharaoh's officials saw her and praised her to Pharaoh; and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house. [16] Therefore he treated Abram well for her sake; and gave him sheep and oxen and donkeys and male and female servants and female donkeys and camels. [17] But the LORD struck Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife. [18] Then Pharaoh called Abram and said, "What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife? [19] "Why did you say, 'She is my sister,' so that I took her for my wife? Now then, here is your wife, take her and go." [20] Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him; and they escorted him away, with his wife and all that belonged to him (Gen. 12:10-20).

> [1] Now Abraham journeyed from there toward the land of the Negev, and settled between Kadesh and Shur; then he sojourned in Gerar. [2] Abraham said of Sarah his wife, "She is my sister." So Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah. [3] But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said to him, "Behold, you are a dead man because of the woman whom you have taken, for she is married." [4] Now Abimelech had not come near her; and he said, "Lord, will You slay a nation, even though blameless? [5] "Did he not himself say to me, 'She is my sister'? And she herself said, 'He is my brother.' In the **integrity** of my heart and the innocence of my hands I have done this." [6] Then God said to him in the dream, "Yes, I know that in the **integrity** of your heart you have done this, and I also kept you from sinning against Me; therefore I did not let you touch her. [7] "Now therefore, restore the man's wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for you and you will live. But if you do not restore her, know that you shall surely die, you and all who are yours." [8] So Abimelech arose early in the morning and called all his servants and told all these things in their hearing; and the men were greatly frightened. [9] Then Abimelech called Abraham and said to him, "What have you done to us? And how have I sinned against you, that you have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? You have done to me things that ought not to be done." [10] And Abimelech said to Abraham, "What have you encountered, that you have done this thing?" [11] Abraham said, "Because I thought, surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife. [12] "Besides, she actually is my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife; [13] and it came about, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said to her, 'This is the kindness which you will show to me: everywhere we go, say of me, "He is my brother."'" [14] Abimelech then took sheep and oxen and male and female servants, and gave them to Abraham, and restored his wife Sarah to him. [15] Abimelech said, "Behold, my land is before you; settle wherever you please." [16] To Sarah he said, "Behold, I have given your brother a thousand pieces of silver; behold, it is your vindication before all who are with you, and before all men you are cleared." [17] Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife and his maids, so that they bore children. [18] For the LORD had closed fast all the wombs of the household of Abimelech because of Sarah, Abraham's wife (Gen. 20:1-18).

> [1] Now there was a famine in the land, besides the previous famine that had occurred in the days of Abraham. So Isaac went to Gerar, to Abimelech king of the Philistines. [2] The LORD appeared to him and said, "Do not go down to Egypt; stay in the land of which I shall tell you. [3] "Sojourn in this land and I will be with you and bless you, for to you and to your descendants I will give all these lands, and I will establish the oath which I swore to your father Abraham. [4] "I will multiply your descendants as the stars of heaven, and will give your descendants all these lands; and by your descendants all the nations of the earth shall be blessed; [5] because Abraham obeyed Me and kept My charge, My commandments, My statutes and My laws." [6] So Isaac lived in Gerar. [7] When the men of the place asked about his wife, he said, "She is my sister," for he was afraid to say, "my wife," thinking, "the men of the place might kill me on account of Rebekah, for she is beautiful." [8] It came about, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out through a window, and saw, and behold, Isaac was caressing his wife Rebekah. [9] Then Abimelech called Isaac and said, "Behold, certainly she is your wife! How then did you say, 'She is my sister'?" And Isaac said to him, "Because I said, 'I might die on account of her.'" [10] Abimelech said, "What is this you have done to us? One of the people might easily have lain with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us." [11] So Abimelech charged all the people, saying, "He who touches this man or his wife shall surely be put to death" (Gen. 26:1-11).

### Hide the Truth & Avoid Responsibility

Like the brothers of Joseph, and also Aaron, some lies are subtle attempts to hide the truth and avoid responsibility (Gen. 37:31-35; Exod. 32:21-24).

> [31] So they took Joseph's tunic, and slaughtered a male goat and dipped the tunic in the blood; [32] and they sent the varicolored tunic and brought it to their father and said, "We found this; please examine it to see whether it is your son's tunic or not." [33] Then he examined it and said, "It is my son's tunic. A wild beast has devoured him; Joseph has surely been torn to pieces!" [34] So Jacob tore his clothes, and put sackcloth on his loins and mourned for his son many days. [35] Then all his sons and all his daughters arose to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted. And he said, "Surely I will go down to Sheol in mourning for my son." So his father wept for him (Gen. 37:31-35).

> [21] Then Moses said to Aaron, "What did this people do to you, that you have brought such great sin upon them?" [22] Aaron said, "Do not let the anger of my lord burn; you know the people yourself, that they are prone to evil. [23] "For they said to me, 'Make a god for us who will go before us; for this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.' [24] "I said to them, 'Whoever has any gold, let them tear it off.' So they gave it to me, and I threw it into the fire, and out came this calf" (Exod. 32:21-24).

### Disguise Disobedience & the Blame

Like King Saul, some lies are attempts to disguise disobedience, and shift responsibility (1 Sam. 15:1-23).

> [1] Then Samuel said to Saul, "The LORD sent me to anoint you as king over His people, over Israel; now therefore, listen to the words of the LORD. [2] "Thus says the LORD of hosts, 'I will punish Amalek for what he did to Israel, how he set himself against him on the way while he was coming up from Egypt. [3] 'Now go and strike Amalek and utterly destroy all that he has, and do not spare him; but put to death both man and woman, child and infant, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.'" [4] Then Saul summoned the people and numbered them in Telaim, 200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah. [5] Saul came to the city of Amalek and set an ambush in the valley. [6] Saul said to the Kenites, "Go, depart, go down from among the Amalekites, so that I do not destroy you with them; for you showed kindness to all the sons of Israel when they came up from Egypt." So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. [7] So Saul defeated the Amalekites, from Havilah as you go to Shur, which is east of Egypt. [8] He captured Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword. [9] But Saul and the people spared Agag and the best of the sheep, the oxen, the fatlings, the lambs, and all that was good, and were not willing to destroy them utterly; but everything despised and worthless, that they utterly destroyed. [10] Then the word of the LORD came to Samuel, saying, [11] "I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned back from following Me and has not carried out My commands." And Samuel was distressed and cried out to the LORD all night. [12] Samuel rose early in the morning to meet Saul; and it was told Samuel, saying, "Saul came to Carmel, and behold, he set up a monument for himself, then turned and proceeded on down to Gilgal." [13] Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said to him, "Blessed are you of the LORD! I have carried out the command of the LORD." [14] But Samuel said, "What then is this bleating of the sheep in my ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?" [15] Saul said, "They have brought them from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the sheep and oxen, to sacrifice to the LORD your God; but the rest we have utterly destroyed." [16] Then Samuel said to Saul, "Wait, and let me tell you what the LORD said to me last night." And he said to him, "Speak!" [17] Samuel said, "Is it not true, though you were little in your own eyes, you were made the head of the tribes of Israel? And the LORD anointed you king over Israel, [18] and the LORD sent you on a mission, and said, 'Go and utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them until they are exterminated.' [19] "Why then did you not obey the voice of the LORD, but rushed upon the spoil and did what was evil in the sight of the LORD?" [20] Then Saul said to Samuel, "I did obey the voice of the LORD, and went on the mission on which the LORD sent me, and have brought back Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites. [21] "But the people took some of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the choicest of the things devoted to destruction, to sacrifice to the LORD your God at Gilgal." [22] Samuel said, "Has the LORD as much delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices As in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, And to heed than the fat of rams. [23] "For rebellion is as the sin of divination, And insubordination is as iniquity and idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of the LORD, He has also rejected you from being king" (1 Sam. 15:1-23).

### Desire for Friendship & Association

Like the old prophet, some lies reflect a desire for association and friendship (1 Kings 13:1-34).

> [1] Now behold, there came a man of God from Judah to Bethel by the word of the LORD, while Jeroboam was standing by the altar to burn incense. [2] He cried against the altar by the word of the LORD, and said, "O altar, altar, thus says the LORD, 'Behold, a son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name; and on you he shall sacrifice the priests of the high places who burn incense on you, and human bones shall be burned on you.'" [3] Then he gave a sign the same day, saying, "This is the sign which the LORD has spoken, 'Behold, the altar shall be split apart and the ashes which are on it shall be poured out.'" [4] Now when the king heard the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in Bethel, Jeroboam stretched out his hand from the altar, saying, "Seize him." But his hand which he stretched out against him dried up, so that he could not draw it back to himself. [5] The altar also was split apart and the ashes were poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the LORD. [6] The king said to the man of God, "Please entreat the LORD your God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored to me." So the man of God entreated the LORD, and the king's hand was restored to him, and it became as it was before. [7] Then the king said to the man of God, "Come home with me and refresh yourself, and I will give you a reward." [8] But the man of God said to the king, "If you were to give me half your house I would not go with you, nor would I eat bread or drink water in this place. [9] "For so it was commanded me by the word of the LORD, saying, 'You shall eat no bread, nor drink water, nor return by the way which you came.'" [10] So he went another way and did not return by the way which he came to Bethel. [11] Now an old prophet was living in Bethel; and his sons came and told him all the deeds which the man of God had done that day in Bethel; the words which he had spoken to the king, these also they related to their father. [12] Their father said to them, "Which way did he go?" Now his sons had seen the way which the man of God who came from Judah had gone. [13] Then he said to his sons, "Saddle the donkey for me." So they saddled the donkey for him and he rode away on it. [14] So he went after the man of God and found him sitting under an oak; and he said to him, "Are you the man of God who came from Judah?" And he said, "I am." [15] Then he said to him, "Come home with me and eat bread." [16] He said, "I cannot return with you, nor go with you, nor will I eat bread or drink water with you in this place. [17] "For a command came to me by the word of the LORD, 'You shall eat no bread, nor drink water there; do not return by going the way which you came.'" [18] He said to him, "I also am a prophet like you, and an angel spoke to me by the word of the LORD, saying, 'Bring him back with you to your house, that he may eat bread and drink water.'" But he lied to him. [19] So he went back with him, and ate bread in his house and drank water. [20] Now it came about, as they were sitting down at the table, that the word of the LORD came to the prophet who had brought him back; [21] and he cried to the man of God who came from Judah, saying, "Thus says the LORD, 'Because you have disobeyed the command of the LORD, and have not observed the commandment which the LORD your God commanded you, [22] but have returned and eaten bread and drunk water in the place of which He said to you, "Eat no bread and drink no water"; your body shall not come to the grave of your fathers.'" [23] It came about after he had eaten bread and after he had drunk, that he saddled the donkey for him, for the prophet whom he had brought back. [24] Now when he had gone, a lion met him on the way and killed him, and his body was thrown on the road, with the donkey standing beside it; the lion also was standing beside the body. [25] And behold, men passed by and saw the body thrown on the road, and the lion standing beside the body; so they came and told it in the city where the old prophet lived. [26] Now when the prophet who brought him back from the way heard it, he said, "It is the man of God, who disobeyed the command of the LORD; therefore the LORD has given him to the lion, which has torn him and killed him, according to the word of the LORD which He spoke to him." [27] Then he spoke to his sons, saying, "Saddle the donkey for me." And they saddled it. [28] He went and found his body thrown on the road with the donkey and the lion standing beside the body; the lion had not eaten the body nor torn the donkey. [29] So the prophet took up the body of the man of God and laid it on the donkey and brought it back, and he came to the city of the old prophet to mourn and to bury him. [30] He laid his body in his own grave, and they mourned over him, saying, "Alas, my brother!" [31] After he had buried him, he spoke to his sons, saying, "When I die, bury me in the grave in which the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones. [32] "For the thing shall surely come to pass which he cried by the word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria." [33] After this event Jeroboam did not return from his evil way, but again he made priests of the high places from among all the people; any who would, he ordained, to be priests of the high places. [34] This event became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to blot it out and destroy it from off the face of the earth (1 Kings 13:1-34).

### Desire for Praise and Prominence

Like Ananias and Sapphira, some lies reflect a desire for praise and prominence (Acts 5:1-16).

> [1] But a man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property, [2] and kept back some of the price for himself, with his wife's full knowledge, and bringing a portion of it, he laid it at the apostles' feet. [3] But Peter said, "Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back some of the price of the land? [4] "While it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold, was it not under your control? Why is it that you have conceived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to men but to God." [5] And as he heard these words, Ananias fell down and breathed his last; and great fear came over all who heard of it. [6] The young men got up and covered him up, and after carrying him out, they buried him. [7] Now there elapsed an interval of about three hours, and his wife came in, not knowing what had happened. [8] And Peter responded to her, "Tell me whether you sold the land for such and such a price?" And she said, "Yes, that was the price." [9] Then Peter said to her, "Why is it that you have agreed together to put the Spirit of the Lord to the test? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out as well." [10] And immediately she fell at his feet and breathed her last, and the young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her beside her husband. [11] And great fear came over the whole church, and over all who heard of these things. [12] At the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were taking place among the people; and they were all with one accord in Solomon's portico. [13] But none of the rest dared to associate with them; however, the people held them in high esteem. [14] And all the more believers in the Lord, multitudes of men and women, were constantly added to their number, [15] to such an extent that they even carried the sick out into the streets and laid them on cots and pallets, so that when Peter came by at least his shadow might fall on any one of them. [16] Also the people from the cities in the vicinity of Jerusalem were coming together, bringing people who were sick or afflicted with unclean spirits, and they were all being healed (Acts 5:1-16).

## Act with Integrity!

The Old Testament contains many exhortations to integrity (Ps. 15:1-5; Prov. 10:9; 11:3; 19:1; 28:6).

> [1] O LORD, who may abide in Your tent? Who may dwell on Your holy hill? [2] He who walks with **integrity,** and works righteousness, And speaks truth in his heart. [3] He does not slander with his tongue, Nor does evil to his neighbor, Nor takes up a reproach against his friend; [4] In whose eyes a reprobate is despised, But who honors those who fear the LORD; He swears to his own hurt and does not change; [5] He does not put out his money at interest, Nor does he take a bribe against the innocent. He who does these things will never be shaken (Ps. 15:1-5).

> [9] He who walks in **integrity** walks securely, But he who perverts his ways will be found out (Prov. 10:9).

> [3] The **integrity** of the upright will guide them, But the crookedness of the treacherous will destroy them (Prov. 11:3).

> [1] Better is a poor man who walks in his **integrity** Than he who is perverse in speech and is a fool (Prov. 19:1).

> [6] Better is the poor who walks in his **integrity** Than he who is crooked though he be rich (Prov. 28:6).

The New Testament echoes these same themes (Eph. 4:14-16, 25; Col. 3:9-10; 1 Pet. 2:1-3).

> [14] As a result, we are no longer to be children, tossed here and there by waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, by craftiness in deceitful scheming; [15] but speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in all aspects into Him who is the head, even Christ, [16] from whom the whole body, being fitted and held together by what every joint supplies, according to the proper working of each individual part, causes the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love (Eph. 4:14-16).

> [25] Therefore, laying aside falsehood, SPEAK TRUTH EACH ONE of you WITH HIS NEIGHBOR, for we are members of one another (Eph. 4:25).

> [9] Do not lie to one another, since you laid aside the old self with its evil practices, [10] and have put on the new self who is being renewed to a true knowledge according to the image of the One who created him— (Col. 3:9-10).

> [1] Therefore, putting aside all malice and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander, [2] like newborn babies, long for the pure milk of the word, so that by it you may grow in respect to salvation, [3] if you have tasted the kindness of the Lord (1 Pet. 2:1-3).

## Conclusion

Speak truth and enjoy God's favor (Prov. 12:17-19; 21:28-29; Zech. 8:14-17), or speak falsehood and face His wrath (Ps. 5:6; 101:7).

> [17] He who speaks truth tells what is right, But a false witness, deceit. [18] There is one who speaks rashly like the thrusts of a sword, But the tongue of the wise brings healing. [19] Truthful lips will be established forever, But a lying tongue is only for a moment (Prov. 12:17-19).

> [28] A false witness will perish, But the man who listens to the truth will speak forever. [29] A wicked man displays a bold face, But as for the upright, he makes his way sure (Prov. 21:28-29).

> [14] "For thus says the LORD of hosts, 'Just as I purposed to do harm to you when your fathers provoked Me to wrath,' says the LORD of hosts, 'and I have not relented, [15] so I have again purposed in these days to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not fear! [16] 'These are the things which you should do: speak the truth to one another; judge with truth and judgment for peace in your gates. [17] 'Also let none of you devise evil in your heart against another, and do not love perjury; for all these are what I hate,' declares the LORD" (Zech. 8:14-17).

> [6] You destroy those who speak falsehood; The LORD abhors the man of bloodshed and deceit (Ps. 5:6).

> [7] He who practices deceit shall not dwell within my house; He who speaks falsehood shall not maintain his position before me (Ps. 101:7).

Do you desire life (Ps. 34:12-16), or are you destined for death (Rev. 21:5-8)?

> [12] Who is the man who desires life And loves length of days that he may see good? [13] Keep your tongue from evil And your lips from speaking deceit. [14] Depart from evil and do good; Seek peace and pursue it. [15] The eyes of the LORD are toward the righteous And His ears are open to their cry. [16] The face of the LORD is against evildoers, To cut off the memory of them from the earth (Ps. 34:12-16).

> [5] And He who sits on the throne said, "Behold, I am making all things new." And He *said, "Write, for these words are faithful and true." [6] Then He said to me, "It is done. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to the one who thirsts from the spring of the water of life without cost. [7] "He who overcomes will inherit these things, and I will be his God and he will be My son. [8] "But for the cowardly and unbelieving and abominable and murderers and immoral persons and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, their part will be in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death" (Rev. 21:5-8)

